


論語
CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

學而第一
BOOK I.  HSIO R.

【第一章】
【一節】子曰、 學而時習之、不亦說乎。【二節】有朋自遠方來、不亦樂
乎。【三節】人不知而不慍、不亦君子乎。
        CHAPTER I. 1. The Master said, 'Is it not pleasant to learn
with a constant perseverance and application?
        2. 'Is it not delightful to have friends coming from distant
quarters?'
        3. 'Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no
discomposure though men may take no note of him?'

【第二章】【一節】有子曰、其為人也孝弟、而好犯上者鮮矣、不好犯上、
而好作亂者、未之有也。【二節】君子務本、本立、而道生、孝
        CHAP. II. 1. The philosopher Yu said, 'They are few who,
being filial and fraternal, are fond of offending against their
superiors. There have been none, who, not liking to offend
against their superiors, have been fond of stirring up confusion.
        2. 'The superior man bends his attention to what is
radical.

弟也者、其為仁之本與。
【第三章】子曰、巧言令色、鮮矣仁。
【第四章】曾子曰、吾日三省吾身、為人謀、而不忠乎、與朋友交、而不信
乎、傳不習乎。
That being established, all practical courses naturally grow up.
Filial piety and fraternal submission!-- are they not the root of
all benevolent actions?'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Fine words and an
insinuating appearance are seldom associated with true virtue.'
        CHAP. IV. The philosopher Tsang said, 'I daily examine
myself on three points:-- whether, in transacting business for
others, I may have been not faithful;-- whether, in intercourse
with friends, I may have been not sincere;-- whether I may
have not mastered and practised the instructions of my
teacher.'

【第五章】子曰、道千乘之國、敬事而信、節用而愛人、使民以時。
【第六章】子曰、弟子、入則孝、出則弟、謹而信、凡愛眾、而親仁、行有
餘力、則以學文。
【第七章】子夏曰、賢賢易色、事父母、能竭其力、事君、能致其身、
        CHAP. V. The Master said, To rule a country of a thousand
chariots, there must be reverent attention to business, and
sincerity; economy in expenditure, and love for men; and the
employment of the people at the proper seasons.'
        CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'A youth, when at home,
should be filial, and, abroad, respectful to his elders. He should
be earnest and truthful. He should overflow in love to all, and
cultivate the friendship of the good. When he has time and
opportunity, after the performance of these things, he should
employ them in polite studies.'
        CHAP. VII. Tsze-hsia said, 'If a man withdraws his mind
from the love of beauty, and applies it as sincerely to the love
of the virtuous; if, in serving his parents, he can exert his
utmost strength;

與朋友交、言而有信、雖曰未學、吾必謂之學矣。
【第八章】【一節】子曰、君子不重、則不威、學則不固。【二節】主忠信。
【三節】無友不如己者。【四節】過則勿憚改。
【第九章】曾子曰、慎終追遠、民德歸厚矣。
if, in serving his prince, he can devote his life; if, in his
intercourse with his friends, his words are sincere:-- although
men say that he has not learned, I will certainly say that he
has.'
        CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'If the scholar be not
grave, he will not call forth any veneration, and his learning
will not be solid.
        2. 'Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles.
        3. 'Have no friends not equal to yourself.
        4. 'When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.'
        CHAP. IX. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Let there be a
careful attention to perform the funeral rites to parents, and let
them be followed when long gone with the ceremonies of
sacrifice;-- then the virtue of the people will resume its proper
excellence.'

【第十章】【一節】子禽問於子貢曰、夫子至於是邦也、必聞其政、求之與、
抑與之與。【二節】子貢曰、夫子溫､良､恭､儉､讓、以得之、夫子之求
之也、其諸異乎人之求之與。
【十一章】子曰、父在、觀其志、父沒、觀其行、三年無改於父之道、可謂
孝矣。
CHAP. X. 1. Tsze-ch'in asked Tsze-kung, saying, 'When our
master comes to any country, he does not fail to learn all about
its government. Does he ask his information? or is it given to
him?'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'Our master is benign, upright,
courteous, temperate, and complaisant, and thus he gets his
information. The master's mode of asking information!-- is it
not different from that of other men?'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'While a man's father is alive,
look at the bent of his will; when his father is dead, look at his
conduct. If for three years he does not alter from the way of
his father, he may be called filial.'

【十二章】【一節】有子曰、禮之用、和為貴、先王之道、斯為美；小大由
之。【二節】有所不行、知和而和、不以禮節之、亦不可行也。
【十三章】有子曰、信近於義、言可復也、恭近於禮、遠恥辱也、因不失其
親、亦可宗也。
【十四章】子曰、君子食無求
CHAP. XII. 1. The philosopher Yu said, 'In practising the rules of
propriety, a natural ease is to be prized. In the ways prescribed
by the ancient kings, this is the excellent quality, and in things
small and great we follow them.
        2. 'Yet it is not to be observed in all cases. If one, knowing
how such ease should be prized, manifests it, without
regulating it by the rules of propriety, this likewise is not to be
done.'
        CHAP. XIII. The philosopher Yu said, 'When agreements
are made according to what is right, what is spoken can be
made good. When respect is shown according to what is proper,
one keeps far from shame and disgrace. When the parties upon
whom a man leans are proper persons to be intimate with, he
can make them his guides and masters.'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who aims to be a man of
complete virtue in his food does not seek to gratify his
appetite, nor

飽、居無求安、敏於事、而慎於言、就有道、而正焉、可謂好學也已。
【十五章】【一節】子貢曰貧、而無諂、富而無驕、何如。子曰、可也、未
若貧而樂、富而好禮者也。【二節】子貢曰、詩云、如切如磋、如琢如磨、
其斯之謂與。【三節】子曰、賜也、始可與言詩
in his dwelling place does he seek the appliances of ease; he is
earnest in what he is doing, and careful in his speech; he
frequents the company of men of principle that he may be
rectified:-- such a person may be said indeed to love to learn.'
        CHAP. XV. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'What do you pronounce
concerning the poor man who yet does not flatter, and the rich
man who is not proud?' The Master replied, 'They will do; but
they are not equal to him, who, though poor, is yet cheerful,
and to him, who, though rich, loves the rules of propriety.'
        2. Tsze-kung replied, 'It is said in the Book of Poetry, "As
you cut and then file, as you carve and then polish."-- The
meaning is the same, I apprehend, as that which you have just
expressed.'
        3. The Master said, 'With one like Ts'ze, I can begin to
talk

已矣、告諸往而知來者。
【十六章】子曰、不患人之不己知、患不知人也。
about the odes. I told him one point, and he knew its proper
sequence.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'I will not be afflicted at
men's not knowing me; I will be afflicted that I do not know
men.'
